The Bitcoin protocol is a special set of rules implemented using an economic model and crpytographic tools to create a system which solve two major issues in electronic payment systems :

1. Double Spending :
    Previously the most significant obstacle in creating an electronic cash system was the issue of double spending. Double spending means that the same set of digital money is spent twice by the owner and there is no easy method to prevent it. Existing digital cash solutions introduced centralised mechanisms to monitor all transactions and prevent double spending. The centralised nature of these systems created a bottleneck that needed to be trusted for the validity of the system. Bitcoin solves the double spending problem without the need of a centralised system by publishing all transactions publicly. The only way to confirm the absence of a transaction (Spending same coins twice) is to be aware of all transactions. To accomplish this without a trusted party, transactions are publicly announced. The network follows something called the first seen rule, which means that the first transaction seen spending coins is considered by the network as the legitimate transaction. This works in conjunction with another significant innovation of using a UTXO (unspent transaction output) system in place of the traditional system of Accounts which gives a unique history to every coin that exists in the system tracing back to the “minting” or “genesis” of the coins.

2. Solution to Byzantine Generals Problem ( or BFT ) using a Proof of Work System :
    When the records of transactions are being stored, most traditional systems have an extensive and complicated clearing and settlement systems to ensure the correctness and completeness of the accounting of money. Bitcoin solves this quite elegantly by creating a network of nodes at the centre of the network which typically will do the work of transaction verification and validation. These nodes perform what is called proof-of-work, a process which uses CPU to cycle through combinations of “nonce and block header” resulting in a hashed and timestamped record of all valid transactions received from the start of the cycle in what is called a block. The very nature of the proof-of-work process is such that it cannot be faked, misrepresented or otherwise it is falsified. Bitcoin node software, which encodes the protocol for creation of a network, maintains the transactions that happen on the network replacing the traditional silos for such processing. These nodes compete using a set of network rules which requires them to spend computing power to solve a mathematical problem or a “computation puzzle”. This “computation puzzle” is typically solved in around 10 mins by one of the nodes in the network and they “win” the competition. The reward they get is a set of new coins to be introduced in the system and the transaction fees from the transactions they commit to the ledger. This replaces the previous components of trusting a central node in the network to act honestly with a system to incentivizes honesty. Nodes make money only if they act honestly, and lose money if they are dishonest due to the extensive computation involved requiring spending energy.
    