Anyone who has worked in software development has seen when IT systems are built for a business where the data is needed to be referenced again in future, it is stored in Databases. The remaining application is built around the data store either reading it or writing into this database. The Data access modules, Business logic and various other abstractions like APIs or Events or messages are all built on top of the data stored in the database.

You can think of Bitcoin Ledger in a similar manner. It is a database that is structured in a special form where records are made up of transactions grouped in a segment called a block and these blocks are updated every 10 mins with a new block of data. It could be implemented using any of the databases but to give example, in the current implementation of protocol, internally the storage of blocks uses LevelDB database and the data is stored in raw format (as binary in blk000n.dat files).

A LevelDB index is maintained in an Index file stored in Berkeley Database, which helps to quickly lookup Blocks/UTXO/Transactions. As technology advances it is expected that these implementations will be replaced by new better replacements for performance sake, but the core rule set of the protocol shall remain the same. The Ledger however, is also not a traditional SQL or NoSQL database, and follows its unique data structure properties regarding storing and accessing of data/information back from the ledger. The data from Bitcoin is easily searchable, reliable/immutable and available almost 100% with no downtime whatsoever making it an ideal data store for business applications.

Building applications using the bitcoin ledger will be a new paradigm of application development due to a different set of properties of this data store using a distributed blockchain, but it brings in a lot of exciting features to backend and infrastructure development which were not possible earlier. Broadly classified, there are features that belong to Bitcoin which enables micro transactions and the economic model which provides the security to the network. We will discuss all of these attributes during this course and the tools which help build applications using these properties.
